# Harnessing data from biodiversity genomics projects

This is the description for the project called "Harnessing data from biodiversity genomics projects" in the Digital Life Norway course [BT8121 - Transdisciplinary biotechnology](https://www.digitallifenorway.org/research-school/events/BT8121---transdisciplinary-biotechnology_2022.html). Here you will find relavant literature, introductions and guides to relevant tools and presentations given, in addition to the description of the project itself.

The overall aim of this project is to use comparative genomics tools on a set of species to find interesting patterns between those species. The species selected here are within [Mucoromycota](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mucoromycota), a division within fungi. Many species of this division have been used to produce lipids, polyphosphates and carotenoids. Since these are important in biotechnology, many of these species have published data regarding how well they produce different lipids, polyphosphates and carotenoids. Therefore, another aspect of this project would be to find phenotypical differences (how much of a particular lipid produced for instance) and try to trace these differences to genomic differences and the other way, find genomic differences and figure out what that might lead to in phenotypical differences. 

To reach the aims of this project, you will have to use different comparative genomic tools, search existing litterature for experimental data and connect this based on the phylogeny between the different species. Here we will suggest some tools that should enable you to reach these goals, but you can also chose to use other approaches than these. 
. 
As a starting point, you should use the relevant species from [EnsemblFungi](https://fungi.ensembl.org/index.html). (Helle, hvordan sier vi best hvilke arter?). We have set up a project on [Saga](https://documentation.sigma2.no/hpc_machines/saga.html) where you can install programs and run different analyses. You should download the genomes and annotated proteins for the species from EnsemblFungi. To get an understanding of differences in gene sets between the species, [OrthoFinder](https://github.com/davidemms/OrthoFinder) is a good tool to run on the annotated proteins. Read more about it here (link to the description of the program from Helle). 

In addtion, [Cactus](https://github.com/ComparativeGenomicsToolkit/cactus) can used to generate a multiple whole genome alignment of the species. The alignment can be used to genomic differences (insertions, deletions, inversions, duplications, transpositions) between the different species. For instance, a possible expansion in a gene family (from OrthoFinder results) can then be traced to the genome level. Read more about Cactus here (link to description).
